---
date: 2023-12-28 16:00:00
layout: post
title: My RSS Feed Subscription Lists
subtitle: I share my personal RSS feed subscription list that I've had from January 31st, 2021 to December 28th, 2023.
description: The author is making a conscious decision to shift from passive consumption of various content to actively directing their own knowledge consumption. They express a desire to move away from the accumulation of knowledge for its own sake and instead focus on deploying their existing knowledge. The decision is influenced by five years of experience and a realization that living in the moment and being prepared for any circumstance based on past learning is a priority, leading to a shift towards knowledge creation in 2024 and beyond.
image: https://res.cloudinary.com/dtf8hxbjn/image/upload/v1703795842/rss-feed/output_rozu8w.jpg
optimized_image: https://res.cloudinary.com/dtf8hxbjn/image/upload/c_scale,w_380/v1703795842/rss-feed/output_rozu8w.jpg
category: tips
tags:
  - blog
  - tips
  - learning
author: Michael
paginate: true
---

It has been a difficult decision to come to terms with. I am shifting gears and will no longer passively let in various content. What I mean is that I will be directing my own knowledge consumption. I have so many directions to go in just from what I already have in my Obsidian vault. I'm pivoting from knowledge accumulation to knowledge deployment. When I was younger, high school and college me, I was trying to keep up with whatever was published. I wasn't an expert in anything and I had to let stuff come to me. I didn't know what was out there until I got out there. Well, now I've been out here for quite some time, 5 years? My sample size for figurative content is wildly apparent now. I feel like I am ready to start deliberating on matters of my own. I am moving away from trying to learn 'just in case' knowledge. If you're curious and monomaniacal like me, it can become exhausting to deceive yourself with the idea that you're 'keeping up.' In a sense, the rss feeds could be compared to a scholarly highbrow version of tiktok - the very essence of what I was trying to escape. In essence, both processes are disrupting immersion by rotating around various different topics (generally). 

Now, I am prioritizing living in the moment - being best equipped for any circumstance based on what I've learned over the past 5 years since I've started this driven-pursuit. For myself and for others, if you're wondering what content shaped my thinking, I am providing the .opml file of the rss feeds that I've subscribed to over the years from the start of 2021 to the end of 2023.

<a href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mmccoy-01/mmccoy-01.github.io/710fc8a04db1a31fb9e6e852b7a71541aa677c90/src/files/rss-feed.zip">Download here</a>

I've used Reeder 5 as my app of choice and have loved it dearly. Although, you should be able to import the .opml file into any RSS feed reader.

I'm looking forward to the change of pace from knowledge consumption to knowledge creation in 2024 and beyond!
