---
date: 2024-09-02 21:11:05
layout: post
title: Exercise
subtitle: 🏋️ Muscular hypertrophy is achieved by progressively increasing the weight over time.
description: This text explores the fundamental principles of strength training, emphasizing the importance of focusing on compound lifts, progressively increasing weights, and maintaining simplicity in your approach. It draws inspiration from Milo of Croton's method, illustrating how progressive overload drives muscle growth and strength development. Key metrics, such as aiming for a total lift of 500kg across Squats, Bench Press, and Deadlifts, are discussed, along with optimal rep and set ranges for muscle development. The text also highlights the significance of proper technique, balanced muscle training, and the role of nutrition and recovery in achieving fitness goals. By understanding that muscle engagement is more critical than just lifting heavier weights, you can enhance your training effectiveness and overall strength.
image: https://res.cloudinary.com/dtf8hxbjn/image/upload/v1725324178/Exercise/5209EFC3-B6F3-415C-AA6E-FBAB57123317_jcgarf.jpg
optimized_image: https://res.cloudinary.com/dtf8hxbjn/image/upload/t_w380/v1725324178/Exercise/5209EFC3-B6F3-415C-AA6E-FBAB57123317_jcgarf.jpg
category: tips
tags:
  - exercise
  - tips
author: Michael
paginate: true
---

<iframe src="https://archive.org/embed/exercise_20240930" width="500" height="30" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Jump to [my current exercise routine](#my-exercise-routine)

Much of the philosophy behind this post is attriubted to Mehdi of [StrongLifts](https://stronglifts.com/stronglifts-5x5/)

In Ancient Greece, there was a legendary figure named Milo of Croton, renowned for his incredible strength. His training method, though seemingly simple, is a profound example of progressive overload—the cornerstone of building strength and muscle. Each day, Milo began his training by carrying a newborn calf on his back. As the days turned into weeks and months, the calf grew larger and heavier, eventually maturing into a full-grown bull.

This method was not just about physical endurance; it was a deliberate strategy to increase the challenge placed on his muscles progressively. By gradually increasing the weight he carried, Milo’s body had no choice but to adapt. His muscles grew stronger and larger to meet the increasing demands. This incremental increase in weight mirrors the principle of progressive overload, where you steadily increase the resistance or intensity of your workouts to continue challenging your muscles and stimulate growth.

Milo’s approach was revolutionary for its time and remains a fundamental principle in strength training today. If you were to lift the same weight day after day, your muscles would eventually adapt and stop growing. However, by continually challenging them with heavier loads, as Milo did with his growing calf, you ensure that your muscles are constantly pushed beyond their current limits. This consistent and gradual increase in load is crucial for ongoing muscle development and strength gains. Without applying progressive overload, you would plateau, and the promise of growth and strength would remain unfulfilled.

# Fundamental Compound Exercises

- Squat
- Deadlift
- Bench Press
- Overhead Press
- Barbell Row

To keep things simple, you want to mostly do compound lifts and progressively add weight to the bar over time.

The average Squat to Bench ratio for men was 1.52. The Deadlift to Bench ratio was 1.75. A good lifetime goal is to aim for 1000lb across squat, bench, and deadlift (SBL).

The average SBL for the male lifter:
- *Bench* will make up about *25%* of your maximum total.
- *Squat* will make up about *35%* of your maximum total
- *Deadlift* will make up about *40%* of your maximum total.

As a way to standardize strength across different body weights, the Wilks score is a formula used in powerlifting to assess a lifter's strength relative to their body weight. Unlike raw totals in powerlifting, the Wilks score adjusts for body weight to provide a fair comparison of strength between lifters of different sizes. The Wilks score is a formula to measure your relative strength as a lifter (squat + bench press + deadlift).

>[Here is a Wilks score calculator](https://strengthlevel.com/wilks-calculator)

# How many sets and reps?

In terms of how much to do, the repetitions per set doesn't really matter such that you can have success in a number of them anywhere between say as low as five repetitions per set all the way up to 30 or more repetitions per set can be equally effective.

For muscle growth, the total amount of sets per week is probably the bigger determinant. From there, you probably want to be in the neighborhood of about 15 to 20 working sets per muscle per week.

The last consideration here is frequency. As I sort of alluded to here, somewhere between two to three days per week per muscle group is a great way to go about it.

Here are four things that are generally pretty universal regardless:
1. Your muscles need to go through an appropriate range of motion
2. They need to be symmetrical
3. They need to be stable
4. You need to be aware of what they're doing if you're aware of the context

>Paying attention to your movement quality is the fastest way for most people to actually move faster and move stronger.

1. Improve technique first
2. Then chase after improving maximal capacity of the actual muscle fiber and tissue.
3. The third is in making sure you're balancing movement planes and posture so if you want to get a better squat make sure that your glutes aren't significantly stronger than your hamstrings or your adductors or your groin and the muscles that kind of pull your knees together aren't significantly weaker. You will only ever be as strong and as fast as your weakest link in that movement chain so ensuring you don't have anything grossly behind something else and that you're training yourself so that the muscles move appropriately.

The point isn’t “just” to move a weight from point A to point B. The point is to maximally activate the muscle through a full range of motion.

# Progressive Overload

To build muscle mass, progressively increase the weight, reps, or sets over time. Aim for 3-5 sets of 8-12 reps for hypertrophy. Monitor your progress, ensure proper form to avoid injury, and adjust your routine as needed.

Make sure to complete slow and controlled movements with proper form. Imagine and focus on the muscle contraction. Really squeeze.

Make sure you do enough volume and enough hard sets to stimulate more growth.

Your training quality is higher if you spread your volume through the week over more workouts. You won't get pre-fatigue in your muscles this way. You can go harder, train heavier, and do more reps.

Powerlifting legend Ed Coan said it best years ago: "lift the light weight like it's heavy."

For exercise cadence, you do NOT want to do any exercise “explosively.” The hard gainer must strip everything down to its essentials.

Think of it this way:

>The muscles work the weights. The muscles work the weights. The muscles work the weights. The muscles work the weights.

**“Heavier is Better” is a Myth**. Contrary to the 1RM strength theorists, it’s not the weight that works the muscles; it’s the muscles that work the weights.  Read that over ten times. This is an important part of your biofeedback and the internal cues of training, which I will talk more about. It is also a departure from a focus on “how much” is on the bar lifted for how many reps. This is an important switch in emphasis to internal aspects of performance, such as a perceived sense of exertion and affect, the actual angle of contraction of the muscle, muscle shortening, muscle activation potential, and so on. It’s an emphasis on how much stress a muscle is under; not how much weight is being lifted.  This is the beginning of training maturity not measured in numbers, but felt in experience. The focus becomes, as I said, not on how much a trainee “can” lift, but rather on how much a trainee should lift for the desired effects. How much you lift is not nearly as important as how hard (how intensely, how explosively) you lift. The “heavier is better” argument is a myth that prevents many of us from getting results in terms of physique enhancements. All while progressively overloading too of course.

## Nutrition and Recovery

Remember, muscle growth also requires adequate nutrition (protein intake), hydration, and rest. Ensure you get sufficient sleep and recovery time between sets and workouts.

# Comprehensive Exercise Organization

- [List of exercises from Scott Abel](https://scottabelfitness.com/library/)
- [BJJ Conditioning](https://m.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL1rSl6Pd49Ileo7ledwkOHgERH4sZHTsi)
- [Speed & Agility Workout](https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=zesTOwoSurM)

## Long duration endurance training
- Choose one and sustain duration in good form
- 1 set for 12 mins or longer in good form
- 1-3 times/wk separate/end of resistance training
- >2x wkly or >30mins compromises hypertrophy.
- Unless is done at very low speed, intensity
- Jogging
- Jump rope
- Treadmill
- Cycling
- Rowing: Follow 1:1 ratio rule for increasing VO2 max. 
- Swimming
- Run mile. Rest/walk same duration. 1:1 ratio
	- Do 1-3x wkly. Work up to 5-7 mile total

## Mobility & Flexibility

### Stretches
- [Enhancing Low Back Health Through Stabilization Exercise](https://www.ahs.uwaterloo.ca/~mcgill/fitnessleadersguide.pdf)
- 90/90 (leg positioning) hip mobility stretch
- Cable hip mobility
- Hip mobility (feet on plate) back load RDL
- Hip mobility (feet on plate) front load split squat
- Elevated pigeon lift off
- Groin stretch
	- One leg straight forward and one leg kneeling on knee back
- Hip flexors
- Flamingo
- Cat cow
- Child's pose
- Decline pullover to press
- Neuro flossing
- Shoulder rolls
- Shoulder blade wall lunges
- T Spine rotation
- Couch stretch
- World's greatest
- Plate back bends
- Barbell back stretch
- Hamstrings
- Quads
- Calves
- Groin stretch
### Footwork & Agility
- Boxing footwork drill (with barbell plates)
- Reactive skaters
- Lateral hurdle jump (over bench)
- Depth jump
- U hops
- Broad jump
- Single leg box jump

## Strength & Muscular Endurance Training Plan (3 to 5 Rule)

To ensure balanced development, you can follow an upper/lower body split routine that targets different muscle groups on different days. 3-5 exercises, 3-5 repetitions, 3-5 sets, rest for 3-5 minutes between each set, repeat 3-5 times per week. Higher rep range gives you hypertrophy.

Benefits of Upper/Lower Splits:
1. Balanced Workload: Ensures all major muscle groups are trained evenly.
2. Recovery Time: Allows sufficient recovery for muscle groups while training others.
3. Frequency: Typically allows for training each muscle group twice per week, which is effective for strength and hypertrophy.
4. Flexibility: Easy to adjust based on goals, recovery, and schedule.

You can train harder, heavier, and do more reps if you spread all the chest exercises over more workouts than try to do it all in one workout. You'll be able to do more volume, and volume is the main driver of muscle growth.

The reason why so many people skip the leg day is because its where you do all the squat/deadlift volume in one session (which is a lot harder). The one muscle a day approach is called a "bro split" and it used to be quite popular. It's quite outdated now though. One muscle a day is just not a good idea for most people. It forces you to train five days a week. Few people have time for this. And the leg day is always skipped, even though the legs are half your body.

Thus, the better alternative is upper/lower splits.

1. You're constantly going to get sore if you think soreness is what drives muscle growth. But we know progressive overload is the main thing that matters, not soreness. I don't like being sore because that prevents me from training the same muscle hard again in the next workout.
2. If you change the exercises all the time, then you have no time to learn how to do it with better form. You have no time to improve your skills. Yet strength = skills x muscle.
3. You have no way to know if you're making progress or not, since the weight is different on each exercise. So now you can't track if the weight is going up or not to see if what you're doing is actually working.
4. Try not to skip a workout if you're not feeling your absolute greatest health/diet-wise. Workouts under these perceived sub-optimal conditions will give you an opportunity to lower the weight and practice sustaining your form with proper technique for a full range of motion. This alone will still yield results and is an integrally important aspect of training muscle hypertrophy because in order to safely progressively overload, proper technique must be in place too.
5. Every set should be done with the same level of focus and effort. You need to think about what you're doing better or differently on the latter sets, and start doing this from your very first set too. If you would record every set, from the very first warmup set to your last workset, you should ideally find that they all look exactly the same. This requires you to fully focus on your workout and exercises when you're in the gym.

The two main things that drive muscle growth are:
1. Progressive overload: adding weight on the bar. That doesn't have to happen every workout. But it has to happen over time.
2. Volume: how many sets you do per week per muscle group. Doing more volume typically results in more muscle growth.

### Upper Body

#### Back

- Barbell rows
- Close grip palm up supinated pulldown
- Farmer's Walk
- Landmine RDL into row
- Landmine single arm row
- T-bar rows
- Weighted towel pullup
- Rear deltoid cable midfly
- Rear deltoid cable fly

#### Triceps

- Cross body tricep extension
- Overhead lat pullover
- Skullcrushers

#### Forearm

- Deadlifts
- Farmer's walks
- Pull-ups
- Weighted towel pullup
- Dead hang grip switches
- Rows
- Wrist rolls/roller
- Barbell wrist curls
- Barbell seated wrist extensions
- Zottman Curls
- Landmine wrist extensions/curls
- Dip
- Spider curls
- Plate press
- Plate pinch press variations

#### Core

- Landmine ab rollouts
- Cross crunches
- Landmine hollow body hold
- Landmine oblique twists
- Landmine one arm overhead sit ups
- Landmine rotational single arm press
- Landmine Russian twists
- Patellar loading
- World's greatest
- Ball roll outs
- Deadbugs
- Decline weighted crunches
- Figure 4
- Hollow body holds
- L Sits
- Leg lifts
- Leg wipers
- Lowered hamstrings
- Lying extension pullover
- Lying face pull
- Oblique plank drags
- Rope climbers
    - In a crunch position, grabbing and pulling towards an imaginary rope diagonally above you
- Pike pushups
- Roman chair sit-up
- Trunk/Anti-Rotation Landmine
- Upward facing dog

#### Shoulders

- Landmine alternating shoulder press
- Landmine bulgarian press
- Landmine clean and press
- Landmine one arm overhead sit ups
- Landmine rotational single arm press
- Lat pullover
- Shoulder press
- Single arm lat pulldown
- Underhand front raise
- Y's, T's, A's, and W's
- Halos/Around the world weight plate rotations
- Rotator cuff

#### Legs

- Seated leg overs

#### Chest

- Landmine clean and press
- Overhead lat pullover
- Reverse pec flys

#### Miscellaneous/Full Body

- Barbell back stretch
- Finger push up
- Muscle ups
- Landmine thrusters
- Patellar loading

### Lower Body

#### Quads

- Front squat
- Back squat
- Seated leg overs
- Leg press
- Dumbbell lunges
- Dumbbell single-leg deadlift
- Leg extensions

#### Hamstrings & Glutes

- Deadlifts
- Romanian deadlifts
- Glute bridges
- Hip thrusts
- Barbell lunges
- Machine leg curl
- Decline leg curl
- Nordic hamstring curls
- Good mornings

#### Calves

- Calf raises
- Seated calf raises

# My Exercise Routine

Below is my general current Upper/Lower Split Program Since 2024-09-02. I may deviate slightly with variations depending on how I'm feeling.

## Monday

### Upper 1

1. Bench Press
2. Inverted Row
3. Military Press
4. Tricep Pushdown
5. Hanging Leg Raise

## Tuesday

### Lower 1

1. Back Squat
2. Deadlift
3. Calf Raises into Barbell Back Lunges
4. Landmine RDL into Row
5. Nordic Hamstring Curls and 100 Crunches

## Wednesday

### Rest and Active Recovery

## Thursday

### Upper 2

1. Incline Bench Press
2. Close Grip Palm Up Supinated Pulldown
3. Overhead Press Landmine
4. Lying Face Pulls
5. Halos and Plate Swings

## Friday

### Lower 2

1. Front Squat
2. Romanian Deadlift
3. Calf Raises into Barbell Back Lunges
4. Towel Weighted Knee Raise to Tuck Hanging Leg Raise
5. Nordic Hamstring Curls and 100 Crunches

## Saturday

### Upper 3

1. Feet Up Bench Press
2. Landmine T-bar Rows
3. Landmine Clean and Press
4. Wrist curls
5. Lying Face Pulls

## Sunday

### Lower 3

1. Good Morning
2. Zercher Squat
3. Landmine Thrusters
4. Weighted Decline Crunch
5. Nordic Hamstring Curls and 100 Crunches

Notes: Whenever/wherever I can, I use Fat Gripz to really target forearms.